So our next session is
Advanced Data Modeling,
and I'd like to introduce
Matt Firlik and Justin Henzie,
who are presenting the
next session for you.
Anyone know how to work this?
Okay, good afternoon.
My name is Justin Henzie,
and on stage with me is Matthew Firlik.
Today we're going to be talking to
you about advanced data modeling
with EOModeler and connectivity.
Matthew and I both work in
the PowerSchool division
of Apple using WebObjects.
So today we're going to break
this session into two parts,
which unfortunately for me are not equal.
The first part will be using EOModeler
to map relational data structures,
the concrete example
of which is database,
into objects.
The second part,
which will be handled by Matthew,
is dealing with connectivity
with the JDBC and JNDI adapters.
Okay, so before we go any further,
we'll just do a brief resume of EOF.
The slide that's on screen at the
moment handily condenses every lecture
you've been to so far into something
you can absorb in two or three seconds.
And fortunately for the
tone deaf among you,
it doesn't require a song,
and for those with
delicate sensibilities,
it does not require me
to remove any clothing.
I'll pay you later.
Thank you for that laugh.
Okay, so what we're trying to display
in this screen at the top,
you can see a blue cylinder
which represents the database.
And we're trying to encapsulate
that the EOModel helps us take that
database representation of the data,
convert it first into dictionaries,
and then into Java objects which your
developers will be familiar with.
And what we're trying to convey is
that the whole purpose of EOF is to
abstract the database away from your
developers so they don't have to deal
with the nuances of particular databases.
Okay, so what exactly is an EOModel?
On the screen to your right,
is an example of a very simple model.
And I should explain that
throughout this talk,
we are going to be talking about
the features of EOModeler and
how to achieve certain functions,
and at the same time
demonstrating those features.
So if you can't see the
screen to your right,
then it would probably be advantageous to
move to the center where you can see it.
But they're pretty big screens.
Okay, so a model basically maps a
database into Java objects.
And a model consists of entities which
map individual tables into an object.
And an entity has a name,
it maps to a table,
and it has a class name.
Now the default class
name is EOGenericRecord,
and this is provided for you.
And this basically just provides
accesses and mutators to the
attributes of that entity.
If you want to provide business
logic around accessing and
mutating those attributes,
then you can provide your own
subclass or hierarchy of subclasses.
where you can implement
that business logic.
Also in the model is a connection
dictionary which dictates the
type and location of the database
against which you're modeling.
This is a very useful piece of
functionality because it actually
allows you to browse the data in the
database as represented by your model.
So it's a very useful tool to check
whether your modeling is correct,
whether you've actually got
the table column names right,
etc.
And the other high-level
artifact that you'll find in
the model is stored procedures.
Basically, there are some things that
you're going to do which,
for efficiency's sake,
you might implement
as a stored procedure.
And what we're trying to achieve is
allowing you to expose those stored
procedures to your developers through
the model so that they basically
have one place where they can find
all of these things they're used
to doing with either JDBC or ODBC.
Okay.
So, what then is an EO entity?
Well, an EO entity basically,
as we've already said,
maps a table to a class.
And just as with a class,
there are certain characteristics
that you can specify for an entity.
So, for instance,
you can declare an entity as abstract.
And as for a Java class,
that simply specifies that this entity
and classes which you associate with
this entity will never be instantiated.
They're effectively just generic types.
And the reason you would declare
an entity as abstract is because
perhaps you want it to be the
root of an inheritance hierarchy.
So if you have an inheritance hierarchy,
obviously you need to be able to
specify that the entity has a parent.
And in the demonstration now,
you can see that our agent entity
inherits from our user entity.
That basically states that this
entity will expose all of the
attributes of the user entity.
Now given that you have,
I'm going to go forward one
slide and then come back.
So an example of inheritance in
EOF is single table inheritance.
And that's exactly what
we've modeled here.
And you can see that we have
four entities in the example
which all map to the user table.
This is single table inheritance.
Essentially every attribute
that you are modeling in your
entities exists in this table.
The consequence of that is that
not every row in that table is
appropriate for each entity.
So you would want to be able
to specify a restricting
qualifier to each entity type,
filtering the rows in the database
so that only the appropriate rows are
pulled in that represent that entity.
And in this case,
you can see we have a qualifier
of user type equals one.
And if we were to look at the data,
you would see that the agent
types have a user type of one.
Sometimes entities
represent read-only data,
reference data, typically read-only.
You can specify that
the entity is read-only.
Now, this is not going to stop you from
changing the value of the attributes.
It's not akin to the property
veto exceptions you would
find in traditional Java.
But what will happen if you try and
save that entity is EOF will raise
an exception and abort the save.
Sometimes you know that you are
going to want to fetch a certain
type of entity repeatedly.
And you can actually specify that you
would like the entity cached in memory.
And this has the effect that the
first time you hit that entity,
every single row in the database
is going to be pulled into memory.
Subsequent fetches are
going to be against memory,
not the database.
So you don't have the overhead
of going to the database
every time you want to fetch.
It's particularly important to understand
that caching them does not prevent
them from being garbage collected.
So if you do have situations where you
would like to have objects in memory
for the duration of an application,
then perhaps the shared editing context
is a more appropriate vessel for you.
Shared editing context is
not part of this lecture.
It's actually detailed in Advanced EOF,
which is immediately following.
So just as an entity maps
a table to an object,
attributes map individual columns
in those tables to instance
variables in your classes.
So we have our property
entity selected here,
and you can see that it has
numerous attributes modeled.
How do you tell Modeler which
attribute to expose in your Java class?
Well, we're going to describe
the characteristics of the
attribute from left to right.
And the first column
is these diamond icons,
which basically say,
"Expose this attribute as a
property in my class." Now,
you might be asking,
"Why would you model an attribute
if you're not going to expose
it as a class property?" Well,
there are certain attributes
that EOF needs to be able
to perform its functions,
one of which is primary key.
Primary key, as in a database,
is used to unique that,
an instance of this entity
in your application.
And you can see here we have a
primary key indicated by the key icon,
and it is indeed not
exposed as a class property.
Now, you may expose it as a
class property if you want,
but really changing the value of a
primary key isn't terribly useful.
The locking icon.
Now, the locking icon is part
of EOF's facility to detect
optimistic locking failures.
And every single attribute that you label
as a locked attribute is going to be
compared against the database values for
that attribute when you try and save.
And this is how EOF is going to try
and prevent last save wins behavior.
Typically,
you should not lock any attribute
which maps to a large object type,
so blobs or clobs.
And the reason is,
is because EOF has to fetch those
values into memory to do the comparison.
So there's a memory
overhead for doing that.
Ideally, you would like to find an
attribute against which to lock,
which is guaranteed to change
every time you save the database.
So, for instance,
if you modeled a modified date,
which you'd set up your eogeneric record
or subclass thereof or editing context
to set every time you save an entity,
then you could have literally
one locking attribute.
And this would actually speed up
the comparison because obviously
the SQL that's going to be generated
through the comparison will be simpler.
You'll note actually that the primary key
is not a locking attribute simply because
it's used to fetch the record anyway.
So the next column is allows null.
And this basically, as for a database,
allows you to specify
that this attribute,
while mapped to a column in the database,
may actually be null.
And thus it may be null in the database.
Now, from my own experience,
I would say that allowing attributes
to be null is necessary sometimes.
But I would also say that if you can,
you should try and get away from
allowing your developers to set null.
Finding a database full of
nulls is not terribly useful.
If you need to specify default values,
then within your code,
you can actually override methods
away from insertion to set
default values into those fields.
So the next column is the name,
and this simply uniquely identifies
this attribute within this entity.
And this name is going to be used to
generate methods for accessing and
mutating this property should you
choose to expose it as a class property.
Value Class.
We need to know what type to map
the database type to in your class.
We offer a certain,
a discrete number of types to map to,
and we'll talk about
those in just a minute.
Column name,
obviously the column name that this
attribute maps to in the database.
External type.
This dictates the type in the database.
Now the reason we have to
provide this is because most
databases have their own types,
and they're not always the same for, say,
for instance, string.
So by allowing us to list the
JDBC data types and either
restrict or augment those types
with a vendor-specific plug-in,
we can provide you with a drop-down
list of what types you can actually
map to for this specific database.
Value types.
You'll note in our example
that the bathrooms attribute,
the value class that we're
talking about for mapping to
in the Java class is number.
And for those of you that
are familiar with number,
it's an abstract class,
so it couldn't actually
be directly instantiated.
The value type allow you to indicate
which concrete subclass of number
you would like to be instantiated
for this particular attribute.
There are actually
other uses of this type.
For instance, for car database types,
you can give a value type which will
identify whether you would like to
strip or retain training spaces.
The value types are all
detailed in the release notes,
and they're quite comprehensive.
Okay.
So you can see the basic
characteristics of an attribute here,
but there are others.
And at the very bottom
of the attributes panel,
you can see a drop-down which
allows you to add additional
columns to the view so that you can
actually have a customized view.
If you want to remove a column,
you just select it and delete it,
and it goes away.
Okay, so we've basically covered
simple attribute characteristics,
but attributes can have some
advanced characteristics.
Notably,
if you want finer-grained control over
whether your developers can actually
write to the attribute rather than
marking the entire entity as read-only,
you can mark individual
attributes as read-only.
Custom formatting allows you to specify
in a database-independent fashion
Processing that you would like
to happen to the attribute on a
write or a read from the database.
And this processing is going
to happen in the database,
not in the application server.
So a good example is,
and one that we use,
is truncation of time from a date.
So you can simply specify in the
write custom formatting that you would
like to truncate time off a date.
We're not doing that.
As I talked about earlier,
we provide a discrete list of
classes that you can map to.
And nine times out of ten,
and maybe 9.9 times out of ten,
these are going to be
sufficient for your purpose.
But on occasion, it's not,
and you would like to map it
to a class of your own design.
So we allow you to specify
a custom class type.
And the custom class type,
you create the class yourself.
But obviously, EOF needs to know how
to create that class.
And so we need to specify a
factory method within that class.
And for those of you not
familiar with the term factory,
all we're really talking about is
a static method within the class.
Additionally,
we need to know the data type that you're
going to be passing to that method.
And right now we support NSData, string,
and a byte array.
So having got your data
into your custom class,
we obviously now need to know
how to get the data back out.
And so we ask that you provide
a conversion method that will
return an appropriate type,
usually the same type as
the initializing type,
that can be mapped
successfully to the database.
Sometimes you would like
to model attributes in your
entities which don't naturally
map to a column in the database.
And these are called derived types.
And typically they are calculated
from some other attribute.
And you simply change the
type from column to derived,
enter your formula,
and you will have that
derived type in that entity.
Now because they are calculated
from some other value,
they are effectively read-only
because there is actually
nowhere to write them back to.
Okay, so a special type of derived
attribute is the flattened attribute.
And this effectively is an
attribute from an entirely
different entity that you would like
to expose in this particular entity.
So if you have a relationship
between one entity,
I know we haven't talked
about relationships yet,
but we will very shortly.
If you have a relationship
from one entity to another,
you can navigate that relationship,
select the attribute you
would like to flatten,
and flatten it into your entity.
And you can see here we have agent
last name flattened into property.
When you access this attribute,
EOF is going to navigate
that relationship and pull
that value back for you.
Relationships.
EOF allows you to map a foreign
key from one entity into another,
or an attribute from
one object to another.
Just as you can define foreign
key relationships in a database,
EOF has the same axiom.
Relationships fall into
one of two general types.
To one, relationships,
which basically say there
is going to be one instance,
potentially one instance of an entity
at the end of this relationship.
To many, which basically says there's
going to be an array,
possibly, of instances at the end
of this relationship.
Now, we have two examples of
relationships on screen.
And we're using the diagram view here
because it makes it slightly clearer.
And we have our agent entity.
And it has a 2-1
relationship to agent photo.
And you can see it's 2-1 because it's
marked with a 1 greater than symbol,
and the relationship
line has a single arrow.
We also have a
relationship to properties.
Now this is a to-many relationship,
which is indicated by the two
greater-than symbols and the
fact that the relationship
line has duplicate arrows.
Having mapped a relationship
from one entity to another,
it's sometimes useful to
make a relationship back
to the originating entity.
In both cases here, we have relationships
going back to the agent.
These are called inverse relationships.
You should consider carefully
what you really want to do
with inverse relationships.
Typically, an inverse relationship which
is a too many may end up firing
relationship faults or creating
relationship faults for numerous
objects which you didn't really intend.
Just be careful about what type of
inverse relationships you're creating.
[Transcript missing]
So sometimes the relationship
between two entities is quite loose.
So, for instance,
if we look at the property
relationship here,
we can see that an agent may have
maybe a particularly bad agent,
and he may manage zero properties.
But we may have a particularly
good agent on hand,
and they may manage many properties.
So this relationship is optional.
There may be zero or there may be many.
However, we can say that the
relationship is mandatory.
And what we're saying there is
there's a much stronger relationship.
And we're saying that for
each agent in this case,
if we look at the photo relationship,
there must be at least one photo.
And what's going to happen is if you
try and save an agent without a photo,
EOF is going to stop you from saving,
and you will have to set
up that relationship.
This sort of relationship
won't stop you from fetching
the agents from the database,
but if you then try and save one which
doesn't have this relationship set up,
then EOF's going to prevent that save.
Okay, I've missed one at the top here.
Batch faulting.
This is only appropriate
to too many relationships,
and when EOF fetches
and David Bates The relationships of
an entity are populated with faults.
In Java, a fault is a fully
constituted Java class,
but it doesn't have all the data
sucked in from the database.
So in the case of too many relationships,
you have an array of relationship faults.
Now as you navigate that relationship
and start to use those faults,
they fire and become
fully constituted classes.
The problem with this is that
as you iterate over that array,
every time you hit one of those faults,
it files a fetch to the database,
gets the data, populates the class.
So if you have a large array,
you can see that it might pose
some performance problem for
your application because you have
many round trips to the database.
Batch faulting allows you to say,
when I access this relationship,
when I fire this fault,
I want you to fire that
fault and this many more.
So you can avoid numerous
trips to the database.
It's a very useful feature.
Okay, delete rules.
Now the delete rules talk about what you
want to happen to the destination entity
when this source entity is deleted.
And the top of the list,
and therefore the default, is nullify,
which usually isn't what you want.
And this basically says that
if you have a relationship to a
foreign key in your target entity,
just null it out.
So in our properties example,
if you deleted this agent
and your rule was nullify,
you would null out the agent ID.
So this has the implication, of course,
that when you're modeling that attribute,
you need to mark it as nullable.
And that's one of the
very few circumstances,
I think, where allowing null
is a reasonable thing.
So the second rule is cascade.
And this basically says
when I delete this source,
I want to delete any related entity.
So in this case,
if I were to delete my agent,
EOF would attempt to
delete the agent photo.
So if you didn't want
to delete the photo,
you could just unrelate it.
Unfortunately, this is mandatory,
so I wouldn't let you do that either.
So the next rule is deny,
and that basically says,
if at the end of this relationship
there is another entity,
then do not allow me
to delete this entity.
So if you wanted to delete
something which had a deny rule,
you would have to disassociate
the target from the source,
and then you could go
ahead and delete it.
The other things, owns destination and
propagate primary key.
These things imply an extremely strong
relationship between your entities.
Owns destination says that
the destination entity cannot
exist without the source.
So in this case,
we have an agent with a photo
relationship to agent photo.
And the relationship is such
that it says that a photo
cannot exist without a parent,
without an owning agent.
Now the implication of this
is if you disassociate an
agent photo from an agent,
then EOF is going to mark
that photo for deletion.
The other implication is
that if you create an agent,
EOF is automatically going to
create an agent photo for you,
insert it into the editing context,
and set up the relationship.
Propagates primary key simply
says that when that sort of
relationship is established,
the primary key of the source should
be propagated to the destination.
So we're basically going to establish a
relationship primary key to primary key.
Okay, so having created our model,
we've created our entities,
we have our attributes,
we've set up our relationships.
How does it relate to the database?
How does it relate to our code?
So nine times out of ten,
you're going to come to a problem
or you're going to be appointed to
model this particular circumstance,
and the schema probably already exists.
There's a DBA that's been
working away very hard and naming
columns with lots of underbars.
You're going to be expected
to map this through to a
reasonable Java object model.
If you had to do that by hand,
it would be an extremely onerous task.
EOModeler allows you to reverse
engineer an existing schema
to create a basic model.
In this case,
we're going to reverse engineer
an open-based database.
Obviously,
you can reverse engineer as much or as
little of that database as you want.
So we're going to just go
ahead-- you've seen this before,
I know.
So there you go.
It's created a basic model for you.
And sometimes this model
might be enough for you.
But you're probably going to
want to change attribute names.
You may want to infer
other relationships.
But one thing you'll note that's
different between our newly created
model and our example model is
that the inheritance entities
that we'd set up previously,
notably administrator and agent,
aren't included in our new model.
So we would want to go ahead and
do that sort of modeling ourselves.
But it's still a very useful feature.
Now occasionally,
and I admit it's very occasionally,
you get to a project and you
have total control of the schema.
So in that circumstance,
you can actually use EOModeler to
model your entire project and then
have Modeler generate the SQL that
will create the schema for you.
So in our example here,
we're going to create the SQL for agent.
Now, again, you can create as little
or as much SQL as you like.
Now,
you can either execute the SQL directly,
in which case it will connect to
the database you have specified
in your connection dictionary,
or you can save it off as a separate
script so that you can recreate
this database whenever you want to.
So now we have our database
and we have our model.
How do we give our developers
what they really need,
which is classes?
So from an entity,
Modeler allows you to generate Java code
according to the class name that
you have specified for that entity.
Now for EOGenericRecord,
you don't have to do anything.
EOFs are going to create
an EOGenericRecord,
give it the right entity name,
and Bob's your uncle.
There you go.
Bob Fraser, that is.
But when you specified your own
class where you wanted to build
up your own business logic,
you can generate Java code which
can then be imported into your
project and your developers can use.
So you can save this
to wherever you want,
import it into your project,
put it into your source code system.
So we've created one simple class here,
the agent.
And you'll note in this case
that this class does not
extend the eogenetic record.
It actually extends user
because if you'll remember,
agent was one of our
inherited classes from user.
And basically the generated
class is extremely simple.
It doesn't contain a
lot of bump and cruft.
It contains accesses and mutators
appropriate to the class properties
that you have exposed and the
relationships that you have exposed.
So, in the circumstance where you end
up with a fastidious DBA creating
all manner of tables that
you're now expected to model to,
it's going to happen.
The schema is going to
change underneath you,
and you're going to be expected
to keep in sync with it.
Now...
A while ago,
you would have had to individually,
you would look at the database itself,
and then you would have to model
each individual table yourself.
EOModeler now allows you to synchronize
the database schema with your model.
And what it's going to do is
it's going to examine the schema,
reverse engineer it,
compare it to your model,
and provide you with hints,
actions that you need to take to bring
your model into sync with the schema.
Extremely useful feature.
Okay.
So now you have your Java classes,
and you have your model,
and you have your database.
So how do your developers
get to those classes?
They can't instantiate them directly
because there'll just be an empty class.
There'll be no data there.
So we have these things called
EO Fetch Specifications,
which are essentially queries
to the database which will allow
you to fetch a qualified set of
objects into an editing context.
Once they're in the editing context,
your developers can then manipulate them,
save them, delete them, whatever.
So we're going to show you
a brief example of building
a fetch specification.
So we're going to build a
fetch spec called super agent.
And we're going to ask for--you
can build the qualifier on
any attribute in this entity.
So we're going to ask for
First name of Tony,
because we understand that
there's an agent called Tony,
and she's particularly good.
And by the way,
she has no impact on my salary.
So in this case,
you can see we used the browse
facility to fire that fetch spec
and we got the right result back.
But obviously, the static search is
not really that useful,
so we allow you to
specify binding variables,
which allow you to programmatically
specify what your users
are actually looking for.
So in this case,
we have a binding name of last name.
In your code,
you would create a dictionary of
bindings where the key would be
last name and the value would be
whatever you're searching for.
Sort Orderings.
So as well as qualifying the fetch,
you can also use sort
orderings to sort your results.
You can sort on any
attribute in that entity,
and these sorts can be ascending
or descending and can be case
sensitive or case insensitive.
Pre-fetching.
We mentioned earlier
about batch faulting,
where you batch fault a particular
relationship to make sure that
you get a certain number of
those relationship faults fired,
and thus you have that data
to hand with one round trip.
Well,
pre-fetching allows you to effectively
fetch a relationship at the same
time as you fetch the entity.
So if you know, for instance,
in a particular area of your
application that you are going to need
to navigate a certain relationship,
iterate over all the
values that you find there,
then pre-fetching will allow you to
fetch that relationship at the same
time as the entity and will avoid
numerous round trips to the database.
Raw Fetch.
Okay, so sometimes everybody knows
there is a small overhead,
small, to creating a Java class.
So sometimes there are going to be areas
of your applications where it's not
efficient to create 10,000 instances
of an object when all you really want
to do is look at the values in that
object and take action from there.
So EOF allows you to specify
that you want to do a raw fetch.
That is,
you want to retrieve the entities
as dictionaries of values.
And you can either fetch all of the
attributes or just a specific number
of attributes depending on your needs.
I actually would say that doing raw
fetches is fine for certain applications,
but I wouldn't actually go that way
until you actually have realistic
performance metrics that say that you
really do have a performance problem.
In the event that you do do a raw fetch
and you then want to leverage the fact
that you have business logic in your EOs,
there are facilities to turn that raw
row into the corresponding Java class.
Options.
Fetch limit.
Okay, so sometimes your
databases are full of many,
many, many rows.
One million.
Thank you very much.
So we can restrict how many rows that you
can fetch by specifying a fetch limit.
And what's going to happen
is when EOF fetches,
it's going to fetch up to that many rows.
If it hits that fetch limit,
it's going to stop.
And you can actually specify that you
would like to be prompted on that limit.
And there are delegate methods,
which we don't cover, but delegates are
covered in advanced EOF,
that you can implement,
which will be invoked if
that fetch limit is reached.
Sometimes you're going to come across
situations where certain users,
you know, I'm the boss, I need the info.
They're going to say,
I can't have a 200 limit fetch,
I need every row in the table.
So you can either programmatically
alter this fetch limit,
or alternatively provide an
additional fetch specification
that doesn't have the restriction.
And then in your application code,
you can make determination
based on privileges or whatever,
which fetch specification
is going to be invoked.
perform deep inheritance fetch.
When you are modeling
inheritance in Modeler,
as we've already seen,
you have root entities and
and maybe a potentially quite deep
hierarchy down to your leaves.
When you fetch that root entity,
Setting this option is going to
make EOF fetch those entities and
all of the subentities as well.
So you're going to end up with an
array of entities which you don't
really know what the types are.
So you would typically iterate
over that array and perform
instance of operations to determine
which actual type to cast it to.
An alternative would be
to use the abstract type,
the user, in our case,
and differentiate by values in the table.
Fetch distinct rows.
This simply uniques the query.
So if you end up with duplicate rows in
the results of the fetch specification,
they'll be eliminated.
They're actually eliminated
with a distinct in the query,
so it's not something that EUF does
when the results come back.
Lock all fetched objects.
OK, so if you had a one user application
and you wanted to strictly
control access to the database,
then possibly you might
want to lock objects.
But in the W3 world,
the world we all live in,
this is actually a very strict
restriction of your database.
And I would advise you
actually don't do it.
If you need to lock individual objects,
there is API to support that.
So when EOF fetches objects
into an editing context,
it keeps a snapshot of those objects,
and it builds an object graph.
If a subsequent fetch goes
against the same objects,
it's going to use the instances
it has in the editing context
to service that request.
This is a significant problem when
you have extremely volatile data.
So setting refresh fetched objects
means that every time a fetch is fired,
it's actually going to go to the
database and get the most up-to-date
values and bring them back in.
So in volatile data situations,
this is a good thing.
Require variable bindings simply refers
to when we built our fetch specification,
we specified two variables.
One was static, one was binding.
If you set this option,
the fetch specification is
not going to work unless you
specify a value for that binding.
If you don't,
you can just fire it and we'd
end up with results of Tony.
We spoke briefly earlier about
single table inheritance,
but there are actually two
different types of inheritance,
two other types of inheritance.
The first one is vertical,
and basically this specifies that each
entity in your inheritance hierarchy
is mapped to an individual table.
So in our example here,
we have vertical inheritance,
and you can see that we
have a person entity,
and we have a professor entity,
and a student entity.
And basically, every attribute which is
specific to the professor,
perhaps beard quotient,
would be mapped to a
column in that table.
The implication of vertical
inheritance is this.
If you fetch one of those leaves,
EOF is going to have to perform as
many joins as there are entities
in that hierarchy to get the full
attribute set to satisfy your request.
So with a deep inheritance hierarchy,
vertical inheritance can pose some
significant performance overheads.
The other type of inheritance...
horizontal inheritance.
Essentially what we're saying is we
have abstract entities in our hierarchy,
and our subentities are mapped to
tables which specify attributes
or columns that match every single
attribute in the inheritance hierarchy.
In this case you can see our
professor and our student are
mapped to two individual tables.
Now this has better performance
than vertical inheritance,
but it does have a maintenance overhead.
If you change attributes
in that root entity,
you're going to have to change
the model for both or all
of the inherited entities.
Okay, I'm spent.
So I'll now hand you over to Matthew,
who will talk about connectivity.
Because he's English.
I'm English.
So Justin's talked about two
stratified layers of information.
We've talked about information
from the database-- tables,
columns, and rows of information.
We've also talked about
objects you're generating with
attributes and relationships,
all sorts of API to manipulate them.
These actually correspond to
two stratified layers in the
Enterprise Object Framework layer.
If you look in the Java doc,
if you look in the API,
you'll note that there are two packages,
one for EO access,
which is the lower layer,
and one for EO control,
which is the upper layer.
There's a piece of technology,
which is the EO adapter,
that allows you to bridge this layer,
to take information from one layer to
the next and move it back and forth.
The EO adapter basically allows EOF to
talk back and forth to your database.
Most developers,
when you're working with objects,
you're working in an editing context.
You're working in part
of the EO control layer,
which has underneath it an
object store coordinator.
Figures out where the
information comes from,
how to manage it, how to keep it unique.
Underneath that,
slightly underneath that,
is something called
the EO database layer,
which has a number of different pieces,
a context and a channel,
which represents a single
connection to a database,
a unique connection to a database.
Underneath that layer, though,
is a composite layer
of adapter information,
a context and a channel,
in addition to a concrete
EO adapter that bridges that gap.
Actually, the database layer is
the intermediary layer,
basically between the editing context,
where you want to work with your objects,
and then the database,
where we need to convert
that information to rows,
columns, tables, information, and such.
And your relational
database arrives underneath.
So what we have is we
have the JDBC adapter.
We say the adapter.
In versions of WebObjects Priority 5,
we had multiple adapters.
We had individual adapters for
particular database vendors using
their native client libraries.
What we have now is a JDBC adapter,
which uses a standard API,
writing back and forth to JDBC to
do all of our database connectivity.
We obviously realize that there
are database vendors and specific
specifications that need to be altered.
Not everyone will play in the same
space or play nicely with JDBC.
So to alter that,
to have vendor-specific behavior,
there is a JDBC plug-in to allow
us to implement specific features
or vendors to alter the specific
implementation to suit their needs.
Part of the adapter, as we saw before,
was a connection dictionary.
Connection dictionary is basically the
information that tells the adapter where
the database is and how to get to it.
There's some required information and
there's some optional information.
Required information is
username and password,
which may or may not
be used by a database,
but most specifically the JDBC URL,
which tells the adapter
where the database is,
protocol, subprotocol,
how to connect to it.
Optionally, there's a plug-in and driver
information that can be specified
in the connection dictionary.
While we say here that it's optional,
it's actually, if not provided,
derived from the JDBC URL,
which we'll see in just a second.
An example of a JDBC URL in
a generic form is JDBC,
the main protocol,
followed by a subprotocol,
followed by the data source.
In the example of Oracle,
you'll see that the Oracle and
Thin is the subprotocol.
Afterwards, the data source is
recognized by a host name,
the port number,
and the SID for the particular database.
In the case of OpenBase,
they just use OpenBase and something
that looks like the URL to the database,
which is just the machine and instance
name for the particular database.
The JDBC plugin, as I said before,
customizes the behavior of the adapter,
allows us to customize
different information based
on the particular vendor.
If not provided in the
connection condition area,
it's guessed by looking
at the subprotocol,
looking at the piece of the subprotocol,
basically capitalizing the first
letter and adding "plugin" to the end.
So in the case of Oracle,
you would get capital
"O" for Oracle plugin.
It is also assumed that if not provided,
the package name is as provided,
comwebobjectsjdbcadapter.
So you need to take that in
mind if you are going to work
on your own custom adapter.
There are some ways to specify
your own plugin information.
Obviously, you could put it in the
connection dictionary.
There's also API,
set plugin name for subprotocol,
where you can specify a specific one.
And lesser known is the fact that you
can specify it in Java properties.
There are two properties you can set,
one which lists all the
subprotocol information,
and then one which lists for each
subprotocol the JDBC plugin to use.
This is all in the API documentation
for the JDBC adapter.
so it's easily referenced.
The driver is also guessed
by the JDBC plugin.
You can override this in
the connection dictionary.
As seen here,
you'd want to specify the Oracle driver
if you needed a special one.
It is also assumed that the driver
is somewhere within your class path.
So if not in a standard
location like libExt,
you need to specify
it in your class path.
One quick way to figure this out is when
it starts up and you can't do anything,
this is probably the case.
In EOModeler,
you'll note that there are some options
for modifying adapter information.
You can either switch the adapter
or set information on the adapter.
While they seem somewhat the same,
there's actually very
distinct differences.
Switching the adapter has
the notion of actually asking
you to pick a new adapter,
filling out the connection information,
and actually after you do that,
underneath it's actually
going and updating the model.
If the external types have changed,
if anything specific to the
driver or anything has changed,
the model will be updated.
If you just set adapter info,
all you're doing is altering
the connection information.
So the model is assumed to have the same
database type and the same information
that's still specified in the model.
So if you are switching database
types or rather specific drivers,
you want to make sure
you switch the adapter,
not just set the information.
So new in WebObjects 5
is now a JNDI adapter,
which is much like JDBC.
It's a generic adapter to talk to
a specific kind of information.
We're not talking about
relational database now.
We're talking about Java's
naming and directory interface.
Standard API, much like JDBC,
and there are a number of examples
of JNDI systems you can talk to.
LDAP, NetInfo, DNS,
providing the methods to connect
that into your application.
Obviously, there are ways to connect to
some of these things outside
of an adapter context.
There are probably much easier
ways to get DNS information
than creating a JNDI adapter.
But this is very useful when
you'd want to model this
somewhere in your application.
If you have people in LDAP that
you want to model into another
database or connect into a model
of another database or the like.
So it provides you with the
ability to model this much like
you would relational data and
provide that into your application.
[Transcript missing]
More than me.
Actually, for information on the
Relative Distinguished Name,
you should look in the
API documentation for the LDAP plugin.
It's actually spelled
out very specifically,
but there are some
important nuances to it.
Unlike with the JDBC adapter,
we don't know how to create--
This would be considered a primary key.
We don't know how to create a Relative
Distinguished Name for you by default.
It could be a composite of information.
It's also domain information that's
specific to your LDAP system.
So there have to be ways to
provide this information,
to set this as a primary key if you
wanted to actually insert a row or
create rows in your LDAP system.
One way to do it is to include
the attribute as a class property,
which I know Justin said we shouldn't do,
but in this case,
it's actually okay to do.
You could create APIs and some
programmatic way to set that information.
An additional way, though, is to specify,
as we said before, a write format.
Instead of specifying SQL as you
would with a normal data source,
you would specify a format where,
in this case, if we wanted our Relative
Distinguished Name to be,
for example, RCN, our common name,
we would just specify CN equals,
and then we use a greater than
and less than sign notation
to specify an attribute within
the context of this entity.
So in this case, we could specify CN.
That would write physically the
string CN equals whatever the
value of the common name into
the Relative Distinguished Name.
There are some differences between
object representations in JNDI and JDBC.
You'll note that every single
entity in this particular model has
an attribute called object class.
It is not a class property.
It's not a primary key.
It's a string that represents
the object class of an object
or an entity within LDAP.
This is kind of like
an object within Java,
but a little bit different.
The inheritance hierarchy
is a little bit different.
You only actually obtain attributes
from the parent in certain cases,
and it's important to note.
But other than that,
everything in the JNDI models
works exactly the same as
it would in a JDBC model.
That's actually all the information we
had on-- specific on the two models,
the two types, adapters,
and the model that Justin had.
If you guys want more information
on the WebObjects Beta or
be considered for the Beta,
there is information on the
Appleseed site for accessing that.
We still do have the WebObjects Lab for
the rest of today and all of tomorrow.
If you have questions to be
asked on these topics or any
other topics about WebObjects.
If you have any questions
specific on EOF that we didn't
cover or more information on
topics that we covered here,
you can either ask Justin or I or
probably more specifically stay
for the session afterwards where
they may cover some of these topics
in more detail as well as come
to the feedback session tomorrow.
and the standard list of
contact information for people
if you have questions outside
of what we can answer here.
Yeah, it is Bob.
And for more information,
there's documentation
on a number of websites,
tech support,
as well as mailing lists you
can subscribe to for more info.